[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> What a pleasure
to talk with you.
I've been looking
forward to talking
with you for a long time.
>> Oh, thank you.
>> Is it our karma that we
would be sitting here talking?
That we would find ourselves
here in Austin, Texas talking?
>> Yes, it must be a karma.
Everything is karma.
There are no accidents.
>> You are from New York.
>> That's right.
>> You were brought up Jewish.
>> Yeah, Jewish on my parents'
side, as I always say.
>> Jewish on your parents' side.
>> A Buddhist by
inclination and training,
perhaps past lives as
the Tibetans tell me.
Who knows?
>> So tell me a little bit
about your karma, then,
that you know of it, that
you could come from point A
to point Z, actually.
Because one wouldn't think
from where you started,
you would end up one of the
most well-respected, well-loved
Tibetan lamas
existing in the world.
>> Well, thank you.
That's very flattering,
but I'm just a guy.
And it's a journey.
It's an infinite journey.
There's no end, really.
But I just-- it's just
one step at a time.
And you can make the
journey too, Chantal.
It's not that
mysterious or mystical.
Anybody can make this journey.
I got interested
in these things.
I went to India when I graduated
from university in 1971
to look more into this,
to trace the source
to find something for myself.
And I found it in the Himalayas.
But I'm here to say you could
find it here, wherever you are.
It's everywhere.
>> Do you notice that
all across America--
and wisdom travels
all over the country--
that there is a more
remarked interest in Buddhism
now than ever before?
>> Yes, Buddhism
seems to be hot now.
It may be even a bit of a fad.
I mean, that's fine.
But when the fad passes,
the invitation remains.
The gateway is
open for those who
want to pursue it more deeply.
Of course, there's
a reason for that.
Buddhism is very congruent
with our post-modern beliefs.
It's very rational
and scientific.
There's no theology or
dogma you have to accept.
It's really not
so much a religion
as an ethical, psychological
philosophy of awakening.
It's a way of awakening
from the dream of illusion
and to suffering.
It's a way of living
an enlightened life.
It's a way of finding
spiritual wellness.
Anybody can benefit
by this kind of path
with or without converting
to anything or from anything.
>> That's so well said.
And I never heard it
put quite that way.
Because I think a lot
of people would assume--
make the decision
in their own minds
that Buddhism is a religion.
>> Well, of course, Buddhism
over 2,500 years has been
institutionalized and is one of
the seven great world religions
today.
>> Yes.
>> But that's not really how
we take it so much in the West
and in America.
We're really looking
for it as a practice,
as a way of getting
some benefit that we
can experience in this
life, not in the afterlife.
And I think meditation,
and yoga, and self-inquiry,
and ethical and compassionate
living and service,
non-violence--
all these Buddhist
principles are
very congruent-- are very
applicable to daily life today.
With or without
converting to it,
you could be a better
Christian, or a Jew,
or a better atheist
and agnostic if you
gain a little more spiritual
health through relaxing,
meditating, praying, yoga.
I mean, you choose.
There are many
exercises or practices
on the path of enlightenment.
>> Ethical and practical
living, you said.
Let's talk about
that for a while.
Because I think a lot
of people seek that.
A lot of people want to
live compassionately.
>> Yes, we all do.
And we all want
to open our hearts
and experience more
love in our lives.
But we have to learn how to do
that, not just believe in it.
So I think that
Buddhism particularly--
but all real, timeless,
spiritual paths
help us to actualize what is
in us to make it actual or real
and to live a more compassionate
and selfless life through love,
through service, but also,
through the wisdom of awakening
to who and what we are.
That's very crucial, otherwise
we just give lip service to it.
But we can't really walk
our talk in daily life.
We become a living
contradiction.
>> Your energy when you walk
in a room is rather remarkable.
Don't mean to make
you uncomfortable
with a compliment.
>> Thank you.
>> But when you
walk into a room,
it's astonishing to me how
it affects other people
in the room.
I've watched you do this.
What is it?
I just don't know.
There's something about you.
>> It must be good karma.
Karma is something that we
make through our action,
through our words, and
deeds, and practice.
And through our
inner life, I feel
like-- and from being with
people like His Holiness
the Dalai Lama of Tibet or
my other gurus and masters
during the 20 or 25 years
I lived in Asia with them,
that they carry their
own atmosphere with them
wherever they go.
And I think this is
something that sort of has
been transmitted to me.
My mission as transmission
is to pass it on to you
and to others.
>> Actually, His
Holiness has it.
>> Absolutely.
>> It's a calm.
It's a calm that
ripples through a room.
Is that karma?
>> Well, it's the karma from
spiritual practice from gaining
inner strength.
When you do spiritual
practice, you
strengthen your inner source,
your inner focus, your light.
Your inner light gets more
focused, but also more radiant.
So we call it in
Tibet [INAUDIBLE],,
where authentic presence.
A cheap way of translating
would be charisma,
but it's more like
authentic presence.
>> Well, you've got it
going on, as they say.
>> It's also from not doing
anything if we can just be.
I'm not coming into a room
trying to make any ripples
or anything, just
walking into the room
and meeting people
maybe I've seen before.
We've never met in
this life, but I feel
like you're my friend already.
We must have known
each other before.
>> Oh, yes.
>> I recognized you.
>> Absolutely.
I do think when that happens,
it's a question of remembering.
Because when you came in
just a moment ago, I thought,
I know him.
It was like I'd gone
to school with you,
but it was probably
thousands of years ago.
>> It was a different school,
a different form of higher
education.
>> Indeed.
Being a Buddhist who teaches
Buddhism all over the world,
are you concerned that
specifically here in America
there seem to be so many
different kinds of Buddhism
that it loses some of
the essence of Buddhism?
>> Not really, Chantal.
There are many different
kinds of sects, and schools,
and lineages as there
were in the old countries.
And this is natural.
And people need to
find the essence
of the path for themselves
individually and also as groups
form.
So I think it's healthy.
The essence never changes
anyway, but the forms change.
As any Dharma spiritual
teaching comes to a new culture,
perhaps we meditate
in chairs in America,
but it's still meditation.
It's something we
do with our heart
and our mind, our mindfulness.
So the chairs or sitting on the
floor doesn't change anything.
So I think as there are
many kinds of people
with various inclinations,
it's appropriate
that there are different sects,
and schools, and lineages.
Of course, we have to recognize
that because of a new country,
and commercialism,
and our speedy times.
It may be that if you have
some exposure to Buddhism,
it might not be the most--
you might not be meeting
the most experienced teacher
with the oldest sect.
Tibetan Buddhism
is 2,000 years old.
But there are some new sects
that post-war Japanese sects--
that it started
where people were
chanting to get cars
and get better jobs.
So it's a little bit of
a dilution of the deeper
spiritual message,
although we have to admit,
people are praying to God
to get better jobs, also.
So that's always been
part of spirituality.
That's OK.
>> Some of the people that
I love most in the world,
some of the people I
respect most in the world,
and some of the people
that I want to emulate most
in the world like
you, for example,
that I want to be more
like across the boards,
they're Buddhists.
What happens to the people
who go into Buddhism
and come out and say, oh,
man, that didn't work.
I'm always puzzled by that.
Because the people who are in
it are so happy and so centered.
>> Maybe it's not the right fit,
or maybe it wasn't the right
time, or maybe they didn't
really take the medicine.
If you think of
spiritual teachings
as medicine for what
ails us, then it's
not just that a
doctor or a master
prescribes it or shows
you how to use it.
You have to take it yourself.
And on the spiritual
journey, as you know,
is something we have to look
into every day in every part
of our life, not just
in church on Sunday
or on the high holy days.
So if we don't really
take the medicine,
if we don't heal ourselves,
if we don't do the spiritual
practices, if we don't change
our lives, if we don't--
if we call ourselves
truth seekers,
but we're not
truth tellers, it's
not going to bring
us the satisfaction
and the deathless
peace that we want.
>> No, it's certainly not.
It's certainly not.
How does one begin?
>> Right here.
We begin right
here, where we are.
We begin by waking up, perhaps
even now, like relaxing
and taking a breath.
Breathe, relax, and smile.
It's as easy as that.
We have a moment of,
quote, "enlightenment."
It's not deathless bliss, but
it's a moment of mindfulness.
And we can do that
anywhere at work.
We're sitting in a
car at a red light,
or we're standing at the
elevator waiting for the doors
to open.
We can have a moment of
mindfulness or moment of prayer
where we can look into
another and see-- recognize
the light in them at anytime.
And that's something we need
to begin here and now, today,
not just later when we
study foreign languages
or we wait for the Dalai Lama
to come to America next year.
I think we can start preparing
ourselves this moment.
>> You write about mindfulness.
And I've heard Thich Nhat
Hanh, the great zen master,
speak of it.
What is mindfulness for someone
watching this broadcast?
What is it?
>> Mindfulness is the
opposite of mindlessness.
We all know what
mindlessness is.
sleepwalking is like.
Mindfulness helps
us be more awake
rather than sleepwalking
through life.
So we are more
mindful rather than
mindless with full
presence of mind
and full attention to what
we're doing and seeing reality
as it is.
Clear seeing rather than seeing
it as it ain't as we often do.
Just seeing our
projections or living
in the past or the
future, we're overlooking
what's right here before
our eyes, which really
is glorious and marvelous.
>> How did you
choose your teachers?
Did you recognize them?
>> I recognized them, but
it's not as simple as that.
I followed my heart.
I traveled around in India
and the Himalayan countries
and Far Eastern
countries in the '70s.
And I lived with
different teachers.
Finally, I became a monk in
the Tibetan Buddhist cloister.
And it's a matter of the heart.
And some people
have one teacher.
Some people find many
different teachers
at different parts
of the journey.
>> When you are on the path to
Buddhism and you are looking
for a teacher, are there
teachers that you can walk away
from?
>> Of course.
>> This one's not for me?
>> Yeah, absolutely.
It's very important,
Chantal, today
to realize that we live in
a multi-cultural, diverse
reality.
There's all kinds of
melting pot karma here.
So we need melting pot Dharma.
We need to do some
window shopping.
We've probably-- many of us
left our pulpit of origin.
So we need to check
things out, not
just inherit what our parents
did and window shopping.
And then not just
window shopping,
but going in and trying it on.
And then maybe, quote,
"buying" it and taking it home.
And if you don't like it,
you can still return it.
And there are different
levels of teachers, everything
from enlightened
masters and gurus
to mere teachers
and instructors,
to just elders who have been
a little further ahead of us
on the path.
And we certainly can check them
out and walk away from them.
And of course, if you sign on
with a guru who really requires
devotion and obedience
then, as some do,
then it's a little
more complicated.
But that's a later stage.
That's not in the beginning
or even in the middle.
>> Let's talk a little bit about
the importance of a teacher.
Because I think a lot
of people think-- well,
they can read a book.
They could read one of--
>> That's right.
>> --your books.
>> They could read
one of my books,
but those are just books.
Painted cakes don't
satisfy our hunger,
as Ram Dass used to say.
And I think it's very
important to res--
I got a lot out
of my relationship
with spiritual teachers myself.
And I think we all have elders
and mentors in our life.
So although we may
be anti-authoritarian
at a certain point, we may
be cynical about gurus,
because of various things
that have happened.
Still, there are many
people who can teach us
a lot about the path and who
have been up to the mountaintop
before us and can save us
in trouble along the way,
give us a tremendous boost.
And in fact, it's not just about
finding an authentic teacher.
One has to be an
authentic student,
then into authentic spark where
transmission of relationship
can transpire.
And that can really
change everything.
That's like booster rockets.
That's not just a little more
learning in the mental memory
banks.
And other whole
dimensions can open.
>> That's so well said.
I've never heard
anybody say that,
but it makes great sense to me.
What are the qualities
of an authentic student?
What must I be?
>> You just have to be yourself
and be very honest with
yourself, like
what's bothering you.
And what are you looking for?
And you can find it.
You can go directly to it.
We're very honest
with ourselves.
Ask our questions,
not pretend, and not
enter into the spiritual
path just in one more form
of consumerism or materialism.
Like Rinpoche-- Chogyam Trungpa,
the great Buddhist pioneer
from Tibet, founder of
Naropa institute in Colorado
said-- called it
spiritual materialism.
We can get into the spirituality
just like materialism--
having more experiences,
collecting teachers
or initiations, putting
religious and spiritual art
in our lives and not really
changing or transforming
our hearts, not really
awakening our minds
and opening our hearts to the
love and the truth that is
within us and within everyone.
That would be
spiritual materialism.
So if we're very honest with
ourselves-- and I think we
all are sincere.
We have a good heart,
innate goodness in us,
tender hearted
underneath, whatever
persona we've
accumulated, whatever
armor we've donned
to get through life.
If we could access that little
Buddha, that little child,
that pure spirit, that
tender heart in us
and bring that forth
on the spiritual path,
we're already halfway there.
>> I was just reading
Elizabeth Lesser's new book,
the "New American Spirituality."
And she speaks a great deal
about spiritual materialism,
things to avoid as
you're on your path.
They are difficult
to avoid sometimes.
>> Yes, well, we
all fall into those.
And that's fine.
That's human.
We're very human, but we're
also very spiritual by nature.
So let's not think it's
impossible or difficult.
Just like I said, let's
be honest with ourselves
about what's bothering us,
and what we're looking for,
and not pretend that we know
it all, that we don't need
anything, that we're
totally autonomous,
independent grown-ups, we don't
need teachers, we know it all,
or no one can help me.
I mean, sometimes
it's really helpful
just to ask someone to help you,
ask a teacher for teachings.
And that's where bowing,
or requesting, or inviting,
or making offerings--
we get in relation
to what we receive.
We give.
The more we give, the
more we can receive.
So it's a way of
humbling ourselves,
emptying our cup a little
bit, so something else can
be poured in.
Usually, we're so full
that there's nothing--
no room for any
grace to come in.
>> How does one begin to empty?
>> Well, that's a
really subtle question.
I think we have to begin
by slowing down a little
and seeing where we
are and take stock.
What is my real question
we could ask ourselves?
Not just, what is Buddhism?
But what's really burning
up my bottom right now?
What's the problem in my life?
Not enough love?
No time?
Bad health?
Bad relationships?
Or just fear of death?
"Just" means
everybody has these--
>> Of course.
>> --existential issues.
Why do we have to die
and things like that?
Or why am I not often satisfied?
Or why am I dissatisfied?
So that's a basic issue.
If we could look at
that, that starts
to empty out some of
the other concerns
collecting what
kinds of experiences.
Having experience is not enough.
We need to learn
from our experiences
to become experienced elders.
>> That's interesting, because I
think a lot of people don't ask
that question.
People's sense of malaise,
if you will, in their soul.
And they go try to fix it.
And most of the time when
we're trying to fix something,
it's putting things in us.
>> That's right.
Well, fixing it is just
one way of looking at it.
I try to teach.
I mean, I come from the
tradition of Tibetan Buddhism
called Dzogchen, the natural
perfection teachings,
the natural Buddha teachings
that teaches us that we all
have it in us already,
so we're not just
trying to fix ourselves.
We're also learning to
love and accept ourselves
as we are and see that the
Buddha is in me, Buddha meaning
the light or the divine.
However you want to put it is
in me and is in you as we are.
Then we can keep perfecting
ourselves endlessly
without feeling inferior or
that we're never good enough.
And this is very important.
Then we feel more motivated.
We kind of catch an updraft
that we can soar on.
It doesn't seem so far away.
We don't start to project it
outwards like, oh, the Dalai
Lama, Mother Teresa have
it, but not little me.
>> We all have it?
>> We all have it.
We all are.
There's not one of
us that doesn't.
The light is in each of us.
And that's how we can
begin practicing, also
by noticing that the
light is in each of us,
not just the people
we like, also.
>> Yes.
You mean, people
we might not like?
>> Even the people
we don't agree with,
and even in the animals, and
the light shining on every blade
of grass, and every flower,
and every ant, also.
Every moment.
>> Everybody?
Even the world's great tyrants?
>> Yes.
>> Hitler?
People like that?
Did Hitler have a light?
>> Of course.
It was extremely occluded
and covered over.
But let's talk English.
Can we say Hitler was
not a child of God?
He may have been a
benighted one, but--
>> No, I guess we couldn't.
>> --aren't we all
children of God?
So that's what it means.
And it's just a
matter of whether we
use that potential or not.
And he had some difficult
upbringing and other issues.
Also, many people in history--
really, it's not just
them-- personality--
but it's the convergence
of historical, and karmic,
and social forces that
produces a Gandhi on one hand,
Martin Luther King on one
hand, or Hitler, or Pol
Pot on the other.
>> Yes.
People talk about--
>> Then we need to have
compassion for those people,
just like any other children.
The children who were
truants or delinquents--
we don't give up on right away.
So Hitler was like
a spiritual child
we don't need to give up on.
We can pray for him to go--
when he pays his dues, to get to
a better place in another life.
>> I think some people who
are resistant to Buddhism are
the people who say, I don't
understand how someone can use
karma to explain something
away or to write something off,
like the students in Columbine,
to use a painful example.
Was it their karma to die?
>> I suppose it was.
But it's hard to
understand karma.
Karma really is not mysterious.
It just means cause and effect.
Nothing happens by accident.
>> Yes.
>> So there was some reason
that those children were there
and others weren't.
But there are so many millions
of reasons that conspire
to make any one thing happen.
It's very difficult to
say why so and so was
in the library that
day, and the other ones
stayed home from school
and didn't get shot.
Millions of reasons.
>> Yes.
>> So it's not that simple.
So it's not just
like saying karma
doesn't mean everything
is scripted and written
down beforehand.
There's a confluence of millions
of forces that come together
to bring us here in this room
together now, not just one.
>> Yes, I think so.
>> And similarly, things
happened at Columbine that
we're all part of-- the
violence, and aggression,
and the competition in society.
We're all part of that.
And I think the more
we recognize that,
the more we can work on that
together to root that out
or to heal those divisions in
ourselves, and in our families,
and in our communities
and schools.
>> I've heard people say it
would be hard for me to be
a Buddhist, because I
don't have the discipline.
>> Right.
Well, people think different
things about Buddhism, just
like everything else.
Some people think
the discipline.
Somebody else would
think it means you have
to be a pacifist, a vegetarian.
>> You can't eat meat.
>> A heterosexual, a
teetotaler, or whatever.
But these are all
just tiny feathers
on a multi-plumed,
beautiful bird.
There's really no
prescriptions in Buddhism
for how you have to be.
The principles are ethical
and non-violent wise living.
And some people
like the Dalai Lama
even eats meat by
doctor's orders now,
but not everybody
has to be vegetarian
or any of those other things.
The point is that
we align ourselves
with the path of enlightenment,
and that we take refuge,
or we go towards this notion
that all can likewise awaken.
And we live in a somewhat
enlightened and ethical manner,
even if we're not perfect.
Maybe we're perfect
enough that we
can love ourselves as we are.
That's the essence
of Buddhism to awaken
to that innate perfection
in each of us right now.
>> How long have
you been a Buddhist?
>> 30 years.
>> 30 years?
Do you still lose your temper?
>> No, I never lose my temper.
>> I'd like to get there.
>> But maybe I should.
[LAUGHTER]
>> I think a lot of people--
I mean, to be angry is
a very normal thing.
>> Yeah, anger is fine.
Anger is just an energy.
We don't have to
be afraid of it.
>> It's an energy.
>> We shouldn't suppress it,
nor do we need to act it out
unconsciously.
We can just experience it.
And then we can express it more
skillfully, more consciously,
more healthfully,
maybe creatively
rather than just dumping
on people or being violent.
>> What do you personally--
if you don't mind my asking
a personal question, have
now as a result of Buddhism--
your practice, your
mindfulness that you didn't?
>> Nothing but peace of mind.
>> You have nothing but
peace of mind in your life?
>> Peace of mind.
Peace of mind.
I found what I was looking for.
That's all I have.
I mean, I have a few computers
and things like that.
But as the Buddha said
when he was enlightened--
in the "Diamond Sutra," it says
this description of Buddhism.
When I was-- reached
full, perfect, unexcelled
enlightenment, I had
not gained anything
that I didn't have before.
But of course, that means
he awoke or realized who
and what he was, what he had.
We can realize
the inner treasure
is different than not knowing
there's a treasure buried
under our hearts.
We need to discover it.
>> And it's up to us to decide.
>> It's up to us to discover it.
Do a little digging to awaken
to who and what we really are.
That's the essence of Dharma.
That's timeless wisdom.
>> Well, I must say you
serve as a perfect example.
And I thank you for this--
>> Oh, thank you.
>> --conversation.
>> And God bless.
Buddha bless.
>> Thank you.
[MUSIC PLAYING]